---
layout: post
title: I almost died of doing nothing
date: 2015-10-09
---

"You can't say you're a photographer because you take photographs. You can't say you're alive just because you live." — Masahisa Fukase

If you love the arts, and literature in particular, you are my enemy. You make life difficult for me. It takes discipline to love life and art; this may come easily to you, but I am undisciplined, and uncultivated, and (what's worse) I regard these shortcomings as honourable.

I almost died of doing nothing: whole months went by without my picking up a book or leaving the house, and through an obscure chain reaction this lack of new experiences destroyed my body. It caused me to age more rapidly than usual. Don't underestimate psychosomatic processes.

There are many of us, but we're hard to spot. We live (or 'live') like we're anticipating something. Depression is a condition that overtakes you in the aftermath of a disturbing realisation. No matter the particular content of this anagnorisis it always brings to light the *interminable nature of your situation*. You recognise, sometimes mistakenly, the unlikelihood of real change. Strangely enough, the conviction that things are now permanently broken causes you to live with one eye on the future. You keep yourself in reserve. Your metabolism slows down. You are waiting for an impossible upheaval, a world revolution. You are obsessed with your bad circumstances, and this makes it hard to enjoy anything; at the same time, in another part of your brain, your refusal to accept this intolerable situation turns into a principled resistance to the normal patterns of life. Anhedonic waiting is a way of bearing witness to how bad things really are.

If someone dies, you wait for them to return... but that's a trite example. The depressed people I'm describing here haven't lost anything.

How does depression end? The depressed person (1) dies; (2) becomes ardently political or religious; or (3) stops waiting and learns to live normally, confined to the disappointing present and pragmatic near-future.

Imagine you have no interests, hobbies, plans, prospects, phobias, neuroses — and through sheer good luck you're not depressed, or anxious, or overworked, and you have some free time, and no obligations or debts — you're extremely bored, almost to the point of madness — in this state it's quite possible you would become a writer or an abstract expressionist — but suppose this doesn't happen, suppose the artistic impulse is stifled for some reason — what would you do with yourself? How would this hypothetically free and unencumbered person behave? Is this the genesis of the 'sex addict' dreamt up by North American therapists? Well, OK, take sex out of the equation. What remains is an idiot savant whose whole person points like a compass in the direction of a pure, immediate, unalienated life... a revolutionary suicide... a believer, devoted to the principle of *agapē*... an enthusiast who will one day overthrow the present order and inaugurate something different. Is there an alchemical trick that can turn depression into its world-upending opposite? How about a moratorium on reading and watching?

*If we did not make somebody poor...* We already know that every virtuous person, every ethically irreproachable person, every pure secular soul, can only perform their role thanks to the dispossession taking place everywhere and at all times. That’s the necessary precondition for the virtuous person’s virtuous actions; that’s the source of the raw materials from which they construct their ethical position. The same is true of refined, well-read, well-travelled people. The types of sensory and intellectual pleasures afforded by literature and the arts are continually vanishing from the everyday experiences of the majority of humans, but this is a by-product of a process that furnishes a wealthy minority with the leisure time and resources necessary for the appreciation of art and literature. The lives of these suprahuman spectators are bought at the price of the world's unaesthetic transformation into a giant thresher. 

Aesthetic pleasures are closely bound up with the inherent deliberateness of art and spectatorship. This is true even for the contingent parts of an artwork: a detail may be unintended, but it is always a side-effect of the original design. No aesthetic experience escapes this rule. A devout atheist looking at a sunset imagines he is impressed by dispassionate, huge, non-volitional physical processes, but on a more fundamental level he is pleased with his own apprehension of the scene: the element of intentionality has just been displaced from an external God to a subjective intellect. There's always a bit of mastery, control, and discernment involved in the act of looking — it's negentropic. But the ultramodern world is now succumbing to tendencies that are a hundred times removed from anything like an interpretable 'intention'. The iron logic of mechanised economic growth has developed to the point where it is no longer governed by any single person or group of people; the drastic changes in the earth's atmosphere, oceans, and ecosystems are on the brink of turning exponential and irreversible. Not only have these tendencies escaped human control, they are resistant to contemplation (even at an extremely abstract level). Their effects will eventually bring about the complete decimation of human art: they will destroy art's conditions of possibility. In the meantime they cannot even be 'looked at'.

This gradual disappearance of art from the world takes place alongside a massive increase in art consumption — in fact it is an epiphenomenon of the process that makes possible such a massive increase in art consumption.

>"Never before has censorship been so perfect. Never before have those who are still led to believe, in a few countries, that they remain free citizens, been less entitled to make their opinions heard, wherever it is a matter of choices affecting their real lives. Never before has it been possible to lie to them so brazenly. The spectator is simply supposed to know nothing, and deserve nothing. Those who are always watching to see what happens next will never act: such must be the spectator’s condition."

Depression is hope travestied. The depressed person waits for something that cannot possibly materialise unless they stop waiting. Depression is a thwarted revolutionary impulse. If the world's depressed people could only make their unworldly disinterest more complete and uncompromising — if they could force themselves to stop waiting and watching — then they would act, in unison, fearlessly, and in a truly deliberate way. They wouldn't do it for the sake of art, or to preserve a life approximating the alienated form of an artwork. They would act in pursuit of a more immediately lived life, and because they were bored.