---
layout: post
title: Country Road
date: 2015-09-02
---
{% include image-no-link.html file="/images/godwin.jpg" alt="godwin.jpg" %}  
*Fay Godwin: 'My interest in the land in my black and white work has consistently concerned human intervention — the history, tilling, and use of the land — I have never been interested in wilderness areas.'*

Walking along a country road late at night, a road without street lights, your eyes adjust to the dark and you begin to notice the english countryside's primeval aspect. Silhouetted copses, bits of uncultivated land here and there. At the height of summer the plants and trees grow quickly, visibly, wantonly. Narrower paths are crowded by ferns, huge dock leaves, brambles. In the night the colour drains out of everything, and when the weather's calm it's quiet. Things appear in outline; you can hear the grass moving. If the mood is right you may start to think about how this environment would look if it were left uninhabited for a long time. You imagine an overgrown jungle teeming with greenery. Your mind's eye swoops over and through the trees, sees green, blue, brown, hears the rustling and snapping of overgrown branches. Maybe you picked up this idea from the beginning of *Heart of Darkness*.

You're mistaken — you aren't imagining it correctly at all. The disembodied panoramic perspective distorts everything. The eeriness and silence of an overgrown country, the speechless and seething vegetation — it all demands a terrestrial spectator, someone lost in the woods, despairing, almost driven mad by survival. Forget the aerial view, forget maps. Think of twilight in the boundless forest. There's nothing beautiful about your surroundings. All you can see are tree trunks, grasses, insects, adders, fertile mud. After weeks of walking you emerge from the woods and find you're at the coast. It's freezing cold. There's sand, saltwater, waves, and big white clouds. You stumble out of the trees and onto the beach. How would your lost self look after a month of wandering in the forest? Broken: sweating, shivering, hair matted, incapable of speech, incapable of keeping up an internal monologue. Maybe you're surprised by the sight of the sea and you laugh. A reaction, then, but no reflection.

Leave it alone: don't succumb to the fantasies latent in country roads. Don't let yourself get darkly excited by the hopelessness, the muteness, the sublime-seeming proliferation of nature. Keep walking. Remember that the life cycle of plants and trees is absolutely brutal. They don't even flinch when you cut their limbs off. Could you bear to be oppressed by so many of them?