---
layout: post
title: Umwelt
date: 2017-06-08
---
There were two questions I wanted to ask after one of the presentations yesterday:

- If we're all agreed that climate change is anthropogenic, i.e. caused by human activity, why is 'ecocriticism' telling us to stop using anthropocentric paradigms? This seems backwards to me: it's certainly true that the worldview which led us to this point was an anthropocentric one — the world is for us, it will always accommodate us, its wealth is our wealth — but how does the attack on anthropocentric thinking actually help to save us from climate catastrophe? Surely any solution to the problem of climate change is going to involve human action on a massive scale, and if this is undertaken then it will be for the benefit of humans. What I find worrying about the anti-anthropocentric stuff is that it sometimes sounds like quietism — or, worse, weirdly puritanical. "The earth doesn't have any respect for us, and why should she?" This argument ignores the fact that the brunt of the bad effects of climate change will fall on the poorer nations, or the poorer demographics within nations. Class is erased by this form of anti-humanism.
- As far as literature is concerned: why is it necessarily the case that climate change is 'unrepresentable'? Yes, it's global, happens on a massive scale, develops gradually, we're like boiling frogs, etc. etc., — and I don't think it would be easy to find a suitable *analogy* or *metaphor* that helps us to really grasp climate change — however, metonymy might work: on the day that the US announced its withdrawal from the Paris climate accords, researchers announced that a huge ice shelf in the Antarctic would soon break away. There are pictures of this ice shelf. Obviously these are crises — it is harder to present the incremental, cumulative climate change taking place all the time. But then this is a bit like capitalism. Crises always cause the workings of the system to become much more visible.

I didn't ask these questions because they're very obviously the product of my not having read much (any) 'ecocritical' writing. 