---
layout: post
title: Augenblick
date: 2017-07-02
---

At that time people were convinced we had reached an impasse. Not only that: they thought we were at a historically unique moment, an instant forgetful of the others that had preceded it. The idea hanging over everyone's heads (unnerving to some, encouraging to others) was that we had arrived at a disappointing equilibrium. The only catastrophes that seemed at all likely to happen were the apolitical ones. Another couple of decades might erase from our memory the old possibilities. There was even a popular feeling that two millennia of thought and history could be archived and minimised; in fact, this was happening naturally, each academic year, as the humanities, the old paper culture, confined itself to the old buildings. None of it would be lost — but then the country was filling up with happy, good-natured philistines, so who would ever read it again? We were willing to let history and art build themselves up again from nothing. Without burning anything down we had begun a slow and apparently egalitarian cultural revolution.

The more circumspect academics persisted in comparing the new century to the old one, likening the historical blockage to that other tranquil period before the First World War. But for most of us it was easy to entertain the idea that our suspended age could last another thousand years. Not the end of history, and not a repetition of a historical type, but an evergreen, frozen condition — the next social upheaval was to be deferred, day by day, for as long as possible. We would try our best to keep anyone from leaving this epoch. Not even our great grandchildren would be able to look back or down on our period, because they'd only realise they were still inside it. They would be our contemporaries.

But then there was a third group who claimed that this was just the normal experience of time. Societies have almost always felt themselves to be suspended at the edge of a potentially (distressingly, reassuringly) fixed order. The periods of roiling change were the exception: they lasted for a fraction of a second.