---
layout: post
title: Country Road
date: 2017-09-23
---
{% include image-no-link.html file="/images/godwin.jpg" alt="godwin.jpg" %}  
*Fay Godwin: 'My interest in the land in my black and white work has consistently concerned human intervention — the history, tilling, and use of the land — I have never been interested in wilderness areas.'*

Walking along a country road late at night, a road without street lights, your eyes adjust to the dark and you begin to notice the english countryside's primeval aspect. Silhouetted copses, bits of uncultivated land here and there. At the height of summer the plants and trees look totally unrestrained. Narrower paths are crowded by ferns, huge dock leaves, brambles. In the night the colour drains out of everything, and when the weather's calm it's quiet. Things appear in outline; you can hear the grass growing. If the mood is right you may start to think about how this environment would look if it were left uninhabited for a long time. You can't help imagining an overgrown jungle teeming with greenery and nothing else. Your mind's eye swoops over and through the trees, sees green, blue, brown, hears the rustle and snap of hypertrophied branches. Maybe you picked this idea up from the beginning of *Heart of Darkness*.

You're mistaken — you aren't imagining it correctly at all. The eeriness and silence of an overgrown country, its speechlessness, its seething vegetation — it all demands a human spectator, someone lost in the woods and despairing. Forget the aerial view, forget maps. The disembodied panoramic perspective distorts everything. You must try to imagine yourself on the ground, almost driven mad by survival. Think of twilight in the boundless forest. There's nothing beautiful about your surroundings. All you can see are tree trunks, grasses, insects, adders, fertile mud. After weeks of walking you emerge from the woods and find you're at the coast. It's freezing cold. There's sand, saltwater, waves, and big white clouds. You stumble out of the trees and onto the beach. How would your lost self look after a month of wandering in the forest? Broken? Sweating, shivering, hair matted, incapable of speech, incapable of keeping up an internal monologue. Maybe you're surprised by the sight of the sea and you laugh. A reaction, then, but no reflection.

Leave it alone: ignore the apocalyptic fantasies latent in country roads. Don't let yourself get darkly excited by the hopelessness, the muteness, the sublime-seeming proliferation of nature. Keep walking. Remember the absolutely brutal lifecycle of plants and trees. They don't even flinch when you cut their limbs off. Could you bear to be oppressed by so many of them?