---
layout: post
title: ende
date: 2017-09-12
---

It is “natural” to think about the end of the world — i.e. the state of affairs precipitated by a meteor strike, a terrible global epidemic, or the detonation of thermonuclear weapons. The mass extinction event which ecologists and climate scientists tell us is already underway forces everyone to imagine the collapse of the present order of things. On the other hand, it is probably not “natural” to think constantly about the end of the world, day in and out — though there are certainly people who do just that. Some of these people have bunkers in their back gardens, caches of weapons and tinned food, or (more likely) survivalist wigwams and plans for a nomadic life in the wasteland. These are people who have thought about and continue to think about the end of the world and have decided they will survive it — an attitude which is surely at odds with the spirit of the thing. The end of the world represents for these people only the beginning of a beautiful, bloody adventure, something resembling (they imagine) a film they once saw. These people are sadists. Or, to be more precise, they have a sadistic relationship with their competitors (other humans, animals) and a masochistic relationship with nature and technology, by which they hope one day to be squashed.

Will the world end on September 23rd, 2017? Yes, and it will be a huge relief. (If armageddon comes up in conversation with a colleague or friend, you should by no means express your relief at the world’s finally coming to an end — keep it to yourself. At the same time, remember never to trust anyone who complains too loudly, or seems genuinely disappointed.) It is hard to believe we have only a few days left. We have lived through enough mistaken predictions to mistrust any and every modern Cassandra. We now know she was only the exception that proves the rule. Prophets are to be ridiculed. Nevertheless, I feel I can confidently predict that someone will press a big red button in the very near future. Among the groups who make such decisions, there is obviously an appetite for it — it would simplify everything.

You might imagine, or at least hope, that our elected politicians hardly spend any time at all thinking about the end of the world. Whenever politicians concern themselves with doomsday scenarios it usually means one of two things, both of them bad. Either your political representatives are honest, and have seen credible proof that the end of the world really is just around the corner; or — and this is at one and the same time a better and worse state of affairs — the politicians in question are dishonest, Machiavellian in the extreme, and intend to use an overhyped existential threat to tighten their grip on the levers of power. There is obviously a third scenario — politicians may justly believe that a catastrophe is imminent when really it isn’t — but this is completely improbable. Who today would admit to believing in our politicians while disbelieving in the imminence of apocalypse? Only a messianic idiot — no reasonable, level-headed person, that’s for sure.





Those who forget their history are doomed to repeat it, we are told. But the opposite is not necessarily true. Those who pay the closest attention to history often turn out to have been secretly planning a farcical reenactment of it. This should not be surprising, given that the histories they read are written by the victors. History’s winners are poor historians: they are unreflective, inconsiderate, confused; above all, bad listeners and worse scholars — and these characteristics are the basis of their success. Only the vanquished know what really happened, and their histories are passed down piecemeal, if at all. Knowledge of the past is worth about as much as the prophecies no one takes seriously. Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it, just like everyone else, including the historians.

When politicians and (to use the correct term for their phylum) ‘policymakers’ take an interest in history, the epochs they choose to study are usually very revealing. The more recent the history, the less cause for concern. If they fixate on the last two or three decades, they are surely technocratic pushovers. They probably just want to keep everything on an even keel. Of course they will be blind to larger economic and political cycles, and this can prove catastrophic, but for the most part they will be no more ambitious or reckless than the average pensioner, whose monotonous daily routine helps to ward off the inevitable. When they instead start to discuss events in the nineteenth, eighteenth, or seventeenth centuries — really anything from Bismarck back to Sir Walter Raleigh — then ‘liberal imperialism’ is probably on the agenda, and the ‘global village’ is about to be reconfigured into the plantation it always was; after all, this is a period of history that teaches ‘policymakers’ the value of expansionary, tutelary, rationalist progress. If you live in a country that does not produce the quasi-magical ‘knowledge commodities’ for which the ‘developed world’ is richly rewarded, you had better batten down the hatches, or emigrate.

But when the political class begins to make references to ancient history, Thucydides for instance, then it does not matter where you live, or who you are — at the first mention of empires Seleucid, Ptolemaic, or Achaemenid, at the first allusion to Plutarch's Lives, the very instant Sparta and Athens are taken to have precedential value — you are advised to go home, lock all the doors, and lie down in your bathtub (assuming you have one).